Good to see you again.
In this video, I'll show you
how to make attention work for
predicting one symbol after another,
which we call the causal attention.
Let's dive in.
First, you'll see what are three
main ways of attention.
After, I'll show you a brief
overview of causal attention.
And finally,
you'll discover some mathematical
foundations behind the causal attention.
So to make it more systematic, causal
attention is the second kind of attention
that you're learning about, and in total
there are three commonly used kinds.
One is the encoder decoder attention.
So when one sentence, for example German,
attends to another one such as English.
You've already used this kind of
attention in the translation model.
The next is causal attention,
where in the same sentence,
words attend to words in the past.
And this kind of attention can be used for
generating text, for example summaries.
The final one is
bi-directional self-attention,
where words in the same sentence look
both at previous and future words.
This is used in models like BERTs and
T5, that have a masking glass.
You already saw the case when queries come
from one sentence and keys from the other.
In causal attention, queries and
keys come from the same sentence.
That is why it is often
referred to as self-attention.
It is used in language models where
you are trying to generate sentences.
For example, take the sentence,
I'm happy to be learning my new skills.
After generating the word my, the model
may want to look at the vector for
I to retrieve more information.
In general, causal attention allows words
to attend to other words that are related
in various ways, but crucially, they
cannot attend to words in the future since
these were not generated yet, they can
attend to any word in the past though.
To understand the math
behind causal attention,
let's recall the dot-product attention,
which requires the calculation of capital
Q over here, times capital K transpose.
And then this gives you your
weights course, so Q K transpose.
These weights are added to a constant
matrix which is called mask, and
it's a triangular matrix.
It has 0s on the diagonal and
below it, and minus infinity,
or in practice just a huge negative
number in all other places.
So you get the new weights
as Q times K transpose + M.
So how does the math of attention
change for the causal version?
As you saw previously, you just
need to add what is called a mask.
Let me elaborate further.
Remember that queries, keys and
values are eigenvectors of dimension D.
And suppose now that they
all have the same length L.
You could compute attention
weights in the same way as before,
as softmax of capital Q
times capital K transpose.
But that way, you are allowing the model
to attend to words in the future.
To solve this issue,
you add a mask by a sum of size L by L.
So you compute softmax of
Q times K transpose + M.
When you add M to Q times K transpose,
all values on the diagonal and
below which correspond to queries
attending words in the past are untouched.
All other values become minus infinity.
After a softmax, all minus
infinities will become equal to 0,
as exponents of negative
infinity is equal to 0, so
it prevents words from
attending to the future.
The final formula for
causal attention is therefore very similar
to the attention formula you've
learned in the previous video.
I was adding an additional M term so
that the attention becomes softmax
of Q times K transpose + M times V,
is still very fast to compute, and
as you'll see it does the trick.
So in this video, I showed you
the three main ways of attention.
Encoder decoder attention,
causal self-attention, and
bi-directional attention.
In the causal attention, queries and
keys are contained in the same sentence,
and therefore queries are only
allowed to search among the passwords.
Now you understand how to mask positions
in the attention matrix to make it causal.
This is almost everything you
need to build a transformer.
Almost, there is one more thing,
the multi-head attention.
I'll tell you about it in the next video.